All right, so we're going
to move on now and combine
what we've learned about databases and classes.
Now, some of the inheritance examples
in the object oriented programming section
were quite theoretical.
So we're going to have a look
at how subclassing an existing class
can be a great way to add extra functionality.
One good thing about this is that,
you don't have to have any idea on how the class
that you're subclassing actually works.
You have to know what it does, of course,
and also how to use it, but that's about all you do need.
We're going to use our music database
to produce a visual database browser.
Now the app will be quite simple.
We're going to display a list of artists
from the database in a list.
And when you select one of the artists,
another list will show all their albums.
When you click on an album, you'll get to see
all the songs on that album in a third list.
All right, so let's get started.
We need a copy of the music.db database file
that we've used earlier in this course.
And you can see I've just downloaded a copy onto my desktop
which I'm going to be using shortly.
You can also grab that from an earlier lecture
or from the resources section of this video.
I'm going to create a new path and project.
We're going to call this one Music Browser.
Copy that music.db into this folder.
The easiest way is to just right-click the package name
and go down to Reveal In Finder.
It will be opened in explorer on Windows and Linux,
I believe, or words to that effect.
If you click on that that opens the folder.
I'm going to go into that folder
and then I'm just going to go back to my desktop.
Then I'm going to take a copy of that music.db file
and paste it in there.
Whatever you need to do, to do the similar thing,
paste that file in there so we've got access
back in it in the IntelliJ.
You can see for me it's now popped up in the list there.
All right, let's create a new file,
a new path and file.
We're going to call it jukebox.
Okay, let's make a bit more space there.
I've created that file.
We're going to start now with a small challenge.
The challenge is to use the database tab
to configure the data source correctly,
so that we don't get those warning messages from IntelliJ
that we've seen previously when working with databases.
And this also has the added benefit of helping IntelliJ
to check things like our column names.
That's the challenge.
Pause the video.
Let's see how you go, and I'll see you when you get back.
Okay. So how did you get on?
Hopefully you managed to figure that out.
If you do remember from when we configured
the accounts database in the previous project.
Dragging a database file onto the database tab only works
if the file has got a .sqlite extension.
Now having said that, the latest version
of IntelliJ Idea on a Mac, I was actually happy
to create a data source by dragging the file music.db
onto the database pane.
This maybe will change on other operating systems as well.
But in any event, the first step is to right-click
on the music.db file.
We're going to refactor and rename,
and we're going to change the extension to sqlite.
All right, so now I've actually done that here,
but you may not actually want to rename your file
for whatever reason.
Perhaps other programmes are using
the same database file for example.
Although, I've renamed it here,
I'm actually going to configure the data source manually
instead of dragging the file.
And that's because dragging and dropping the file
onto a database tab-
This is the one over here I'm talking about.
Well, that's really only a convenience
but it's not essential.
Now, configuring the data source manually
let's you use a sqlite database with any file extension.
If you happen to have renamed the database file
and dragged into the database pane
to configure the data source as we've done previously,
then well done, that's a challenge completed successfully.
I want to show you something that can go wrong.
Before configuring the database
I'm going to just paste some code into our jukebox.py file.
There's the code there.
Actually we'd expect, and I'll just close the database pane.
We're getting those warnings
about no data sources are being configured
and also a couple of other warnings here about
unable to resolve symbol albums,
and unable to resolve table albums.
You don't actually have to type this code in
before configuring the data source.
I've just done this so that you can see
that things are working properly.
It can be a very natural mistake that you make
that will cause this particular error.
We're going to go and configure this manually.
I'm going to open the database tab again
and click on plus.
I'm going to choose data source,
and then I'm going to choose sqlite xerial,
this one down here.
Next, you can actually come over here and use the ellipses
next to the file, over here to the right or the file label,
and that's one way to navigate to the actual folder.
But you might be looking at that thinking,
"Well, isn't this just quicker than just type in the name?"
Because you know the name is music.sqlite.
You could come over here and just type in music.
With the theory being that music.sqlite,
we can see it's over here in our project folder,
so we don't need to worry about a path.
I've changed the name as you can see there
now to music.sqlite.
You change it to whatever the name
of the database file is on your system.
That does work in that the test connexion button,
which I'm going to press now, it does actually work.
It says successful.
But on Windows it doesn't report an error.
With that said, if we click on okay now.
Notice that, I'm not sure whether you were paying attention,
but there's this little arrow, it was appearing
to the left of the database name.
The one that we normally click to get into the database
to have a look at the tables and columns, etc,
but then that disappeared.
We can't browse the database now.
The other thing is we go back to the code.
We're still getting some weird warnings there.
We're still getting a problem
with resolving the symbol albums
and resolving the table albums.
In other words, IntelliJ is not recognising those.
The thing is, it's not going to recognise those
until you provide the full path to the file.
That might make sense to just type in the name
without a path that I actually did there,
for the moment at least,
or at least for this version of IntelliJ
it doesn't actually work like that.
But fortunately we can fix that.
We can just go back to the data source properties.
We can right-click and choose properties.
I'm right-clicking the database file obviously.
Alternatively I could have used
the little wrench button there to get into the properties
at the top of the toolbar there, just above the file name.
If I change that now and actually click on the ellipses.
This time if I now go to that folder again.
I'll select my database, if I'll open,
with a full path this time.
Test connexion.
Well, that still works.
If I click on okay this time.
You can see it having done,
we firstly have got this little green arrow here.
The arrows have disappeared from our path and code,
but also we've got the little arrow now.
We can click, we can open up tables and open up
and get access to the columns.
In any event, that's how to configure a data source manually
instead of drag and drop.
Along the way I also showed you a little problem
that can pop up if you don't actually use the ellipses
to select the database file with a full path.
Make sure you do do that
until IntelliJ hopefully can handle this problem
and actually fix it.
Incidentally, what we just did there
with the manual configuration.
Well, that's what you'd need to do
if you were connecting to a client server database
such as sql server or perhaps DB2.
Just close the database tab,
now that we've got our database centre find.
I'm going to delete the code that I initially added,
and we're going to start coding.
We need to import sqlite, obviously,
but also we need to import tkinter.
And we're going to do that in the python2 friendly way
and that's because this app is almost not going
to be able to work with python2.7 and up.
I'm going to start with the import to sqlite3.
I'm going to need to add a try, colon, import tkinter.
You've seen this code before.
We need to add an except import error,
colon, and that's python 2.
In that case we're going to do import Tkinter as tkinter.
Then we just can start with our connexion,
conn equals sqlite3.connect.
And of course the file name should be music.sqlite.
If by chance you haven't renamed it and it's still db,
obviously you need to change it to that name.
All right, so next we're going to set up a window.
It's a good idea to start with an idea
of what it should look like.
We're going to be creating a simple layout
that I'm going to show you on the slide.
That's what we're going to try and create here.
You can see that it's pretty basic,
but it demonstrates some very useful techniques
for subclassing an existing class.
We want to put a scroll-bar next to each list box,
but we're going to put them
in the same column as their listbox.
In essence we're going to need three columns.
The space between the lists will be set using padding,
but there's something I want to demonstrate
when we come to subclass the listboxes.
We're going to set the padding on the left of each list,
but for the far right of the display,
I'm going to use another column
to keep the songs list away from the edge of the window.
You don't have to do that,
I'm only doing it to make explaining something else easier.
We also want a title, as you can see, above each box,
so there'll be at least two rows.
Because there's going to be far more artists
than albums or songs,
we're going to span the artists listbox over two rows.
We're also going to leave a blank row along the bottom,
and that's to keep everything away
from the edge of the window.
That's four rows in total.
Now that we've decided all of that,
we can go back and set up these windows.
We're going to continue on
and we're going to type mainwindow
equals tkinter.Tk,
parenthesis, mainwindow.title,
parenthesis and in single quotes,
Music Db Browser as the title.
Then we want to set the geometry,
so it's mainwindow.geometry.
We're going to go for 1024 by 768,
so we need parenthesis and in single quotes,
1024x768.
Let's go ahead now and configure the columns.
Mainwindow.columnconfigure.
We're going to go with zero, comma, space,
weight equals two.
Mainwindow.columnconfigure one,
comma, weight equals two.
Mainwindow.columnconfigure, parenthesis, two, comma, space,
weight equals two.
And last one, mainwindow.columnconfigure,
three, weight equals one.
Just as a reminder that's the spacer column on right.
We now want to configure our rows.
That's going to be mainwindow.rowconfigure,
parenthesis, zero, comma, space, weight equals one.
Then mainwindow.rowconfigure,
parenthesis, one, comma,
weight equals five.
Mainwindow.rowconfigure, parenthesis, two, comma,
space, weight equals five.
And lastly, mainwindow.rowconfigure, parenthesis,
three, comma, space, weight equals one.
As you can see there,
I've given more weight to the middle two rows
and that's because they contain the listboxes.
If you're not too sure what I'm doing here,
do go back and check the tkinter videos
in section 11 of the course,
because I go into detail about what all this stuff means.
I'm assuming at this stage of the course
you've actually been through that.
Next we need our labels and listboxes.
We're going to create them
after setting up the columns and rows.
We're going to start with, and put a comment here
just to indicate what we're doing.
This is going to be the labels.
We'll start with tkinter, that's going to be .label,
parenthesis, mainwindow, comma, space,
text equals, then artist in double quotes,
right parenthesis then .grid, parenthesis, row equal zero,
comma, space, column equal zero, right parenthesis.
Let's just copy that line task,
because we need two more labels.
The first one is going to be,
everything the same up until text.
We're going to change the text to albums.
Then the grid row reference, everything is the same,
column is one, and for the third one
that's going to be the third label,
it's going to be songs.
That's still on row zero, and the text is going to be songs.
Okay, I love that.
We've done that okay, and let's continue on.
We're now going to work on the artists listbox.
We're going to start with artistList
equal to tkinter.listbox,
parenthesis, mainwindow.
Then we want artistList.grid,
parenthesis, row equals one,
comma, space, column equal zero, comma,
space, sticky equals, in single quotes
nsew, comma, space, rowspan equals two,
comma, space and then padx equals parenthesis, 30,
comma, space, zero.
And then two right parenthesis to finish off the line.
Then we need to also add a config.
So artistList.config,
parenthesis, and it's going to be border equals two,
comma, space, relief
is equal to, single quotes, sunken
and then we just end parenthesis.
That's our artist listbox, then we want to do
the same for albums listbox and songs listbox,
so let's go ahead and do that.
This is going to be the albums.
I'm going to start by albumLV
equals tkinter.Variable,
parenthesis, mainwindow.
And albumLV.set,
two left parenthesis there,
then we want the text in double quotes,
choose an artist,
and a comma after the trailing double quote
and then the two ending parenthesis.
Then we want albumList
is equal to tkinter.Listbox
again, parenthesis, mainwindow, comma, space,
listvariable, all in lowercase,
equals albumLV that we defined on line 34 and 35.
Then we want to set the grid,
so it's going to be albumList.grid, parenthesis
and we're going to start with row equals one, comma,
space, column equals one, comma, space
then sticky equals, single quotes, nsew,
comma, space then padx equals,
in parenthesis, 30, comma, space, zero
then the two right parenthesis to end the line.
Then we need a config as well,
that's going to be albumList.config,
border equals two in parenthesis, and relief equal sunken
and sunken has single quotes around it.
Sunken.
All right.
I'm making more space here,
and let's finish off the songs listbox
before we end the video.
We're going to start there with our variable again,
so songLV is equal
to tkinter.Variable
and it's going to be mainwindow.
And songLV.set and then two left parenthesis
in double quote, choose an album,
and the double quote to finish off the line
and then a comma, two right parenthesis.
songList equals tkinter.listbox
and it's going to be mainwindow in parenthesis, comma,
then listvariable, all in lowercase, equals songLV.
Then songList.grid, parenthesis,
row equals one, comma, space,
column equals two this time,
space after the comma, and sticky equals,
single quotes, nsew again.
Single quotes around the text there,
comma, space, padx equals and in parenthesis 30,
comma, space, zero, then the two closing right parenthesis.
Then we just need the config,
so songList.config,
border equals two, comma, space
then relief equals, two single quotes,
and it's going to be sunken within that.
Then right parenthesis to close the line over.
That's the user interface elements created,
so we should be able to start a main loop
and see how it works.
Let's quickly do that before we end the video.
I'm just going to put a code in here.
Main loop.
And the code is going to be pretty simple,
it's going to be mainwindow.mainloop.
We're going to print, closing database connexion.
Of course we open that right up on line seven,
I think I see up there.
Then we need to actually close this, so conn.close.
Let's just run that,
and have a bit of look here.
That's close to what we originally said we wanted,
but we're missing scroll bars though.
Let's start looking at that in the next video.